---
title: "WASTER: Practical <i>de novo</i> phylogenomics from low-coverage short reads"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2026-03-23-waster
excerpt: 'Tool: WASTER'
date: 2026-03-23
venue: 'Molecular Biology and Evolution'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msag073'
citation: 'Chao Zhang, Rasmus Nielsen, &quot;WASTER: Practical <i>de novo</i> phylogenomics from low-coverage short reads.&quot; <i>Molecular Biology and Evolution</i>. (2026).'
---
The advent of affordable whole-genome sequencing has spurred numerous large-scale projects aimed at inferring the tree of life, yet achieving a complete species-level phylogeny remains a distant goal due to significant costs and computational demands. Traditional species tree inference methods, though effective, are hampered by the need for high-coverage sequencing, high-quality genomic alignments, and extensive computational resources. To address these challenges, this study introduces WASTER, a novel de novo tool for inferring shallow phylogenies directly from short-read sequences. WASTER employs a k-mer based approach for identifying variable sites, circumventing the need for genome assembly and alignment. Using simulations, we demonstrate that WASTER achieves accuracy comparable to that of traditional alignment-based methods, even for low sequencing depth, and has substantially higher accuracy than other alignment-free methods. We validate WASTER's efficacy on real data, where it accurately reconstructs phylogenies of eukaryotic species with as low depth as 1.5X. WASTER provides a fast and efficient solution for phylogeny estimation in cases where genome assembly and/or alignment may bias analyses or is challenging, for example due to low sequencing depth. It also provides a method for generating guide trees for tree-based alignment algorithms. WASTER's ability to accurately estimate shallow phylogenies from low-coverage sequencing data without relying on assembly and alignment will lead to substantially reduced sequencing and computational costs in phylogenomic projects.